IBX-4651 Cart description, API, cart permissions (#1866)
ezsystems/developer-documentation: docs/commerce/cart/cart.md

---
description: The Cart component covers adding items to the shopping cart, as well as previewing and modifying the cart information.
edition: commerce
---

# Cart

The Cart component is a foundation of the Commerce offering delivered as part 
of [[= product_name =]].
It covers actions related to the creation and handling of a list of products 
that the buyer intends to purchase.

The Cart component exposes the following:

> - [PHP API](cart_api.md) that allows for managing carts and cart entries, or validating products

Reviewer: "validating products" is too vague in my opinion. The API indeed has `validateCart` method but it does much more than just validating products.

- [REST API](../../api/rest_api/rest_api_reference/rest_api_reference.html#managing-ecommerce-carts) that helps get cart and products information over HTTP
- [Twig functions](cart_twig_functions.md) that enable checking whether product can be added to cart and formatting the price

There is no specific configuration related to the Cart component.
All configuration is done at the Checkout and Storefront level.

## Cart data handling

Cart data is handled by two storages, depending on whether the buyer is anonymous 
or has been authenticated.
Information that relates to anonymous users is stored in the PHP session, while 
registered user data is stored in a database.

By default, anonymous users can add items to cart, but to display the cart view, 
they have to log in and transition into an authenticated user.

!!! note 

    For information about roles and permissions that control access to the cart, 

>     see [Permission use cases](../../permissions/permission_use_cases.md#commerce).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    see [Permission use cases](permission_use_cases.md#commerce).
```

### Cart data merging

When a buyer browses the storefront anonymously and fills the cart with items, 
anonymous cart data is stored in the PHP session storage.
Then, when an anonymous user logs into the storefront, cart data from the PHP session 
storage is persisted and merged with any cart information that might already exist in the database for this authenticated user.

If no previous cart data exists, a new cart is created.

### Cart data validation

When a buyer tries to add products to the cart, increase cart item quantity or proceed to checkout, the Cart component performs cart item validation and checks whether:

- the product is available 
- the requested quantity of product is available 
- the product is available at a price in the currency selected for the cart 

## Front-end perspective

From the front-end perspective, the cart consists of a main `Cart` object 
and several widgets.
`Cart` is a standalone JavaScript object that manages cart data and has no user interface, 
while widgets consist of JavaScript code and accompanying Twig templates.

### Cart object

> The `Cart` object stores cart entry data and a cart summary, which contains additional entry data, like, for example, formatted gross price or validation errors.

Reviewer: Not true. Gross price and preformatted price is only held by `CartSummary` object and it's intended to be used by REST API. Normal Cart object has:
- numerical ID
- UUID
- name
- owner
- currency
- entries
- creation date
- modification date

Reviewer 3: We discussed this in private and the original statement is not wrong, but may be confusing, because we have `Cart` object in the REST, which is sent from the backend to the frontend and we have `Cart` class, which instance can also be called `Cart` object and which acts as a cart service, but it is not a cart service in our frontend terminology. And these two objects are different carts.

We need to somehow, call `Cart` "service" object in a way that it won't be confused with `Cart` object from the REST.

> The object exposes several methods, which you can use to get and modify cart entries.

Reviewer: The object itself does not expose any method modifying carts. All modifications are done by `CartService`.

> Only one instance of a `Cart` object can be created.

Reviewer: Not really. You can have multiple carts as API allows for it. We just don't use it in the UI for now.

### Widgets

To customize your store, you can override the Twig templates and extend their logic.

> For more information, see [ Customize storefront layout](../../docs/templating/layout/customize_storefront_layout.md).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For more information, see [ Customize storefront layout](customize_storefront_layout.md).
```

#### Main cart

Main cart is the main user interface component of the cart.

> By defaault. it lists items selected for purchase and requested cart item quantities. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
By default it lists items selected for purchase and requested cart item quantities. 
```

Users who visit the Main cart can remove individual items.

#### Add to cart

By default, the Add to cart component consists of a quantity input field and a button.

#### Minicart

By default, the Minicart component consists of a counter that displays a total number of cart items.

#### Cart summary 

By default, the Cart Summary component displays a subtotal net value of cart lines, 
a shipping cost disclaimer, a series of tax values applicable to products 
added in cart, a composition of different taxes, and a total cart value (gross, shipping 
and taxes included) in the selected currency.

You could extend the Cart summary widget to let buyers navigate from this view, 

> for example, to checkout, or back to shopping, by adding respective buttons.

Reviewer: This needs to be reviewed by @tischsoic

### Cart service 

> The Cart package provides a cart service, which is a module with functions used for calling the [backend API](cart_api.md). 

Reviewer: The wording doesn't feel right at all. We are talking about PHP class/Symfony service here, not a "module with functions". Also referencing any class should include fully qualified class name i.e. `Ibexa\Contracts\Cart\CartServiceInterface` instead of just `CartServiceInterface` because in many cases you'll see multiple classes using the same name and it won't be clear which one you should use.

```suggestion
The Cart package provides `Ibexa\Contracts\Cart\CartServiceInterface` Symfony service, which is the entrypoint for calling the [backend API](cart_api.md). 
```

---
description: Cart covers all actions related to the purchase process.
edition: commerce
---

# Cart

The cart component is a foundation of the commerce solution, it covers all actions related to the purchase process.

- It exposes [PHP API](cart_api.md) that allows for managing carts and cart entries, or validating products

> - It exposes TWIG functions used for checkout rendering

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- It exposes TWIG functions used for cart rendering
```

---
description: The Cart component covers adding items to the shopping cart, as well as previewing and modifying the cart information.
edition: commerce
---

# Cart

The Cart component is a foundation of the Commerce offering delivered as part 
of [[= product_name =]].
It covers actions related to the creation and handling of a list of products 
that the buyer intends to purchase.

The Cart component exposes the following:

- [PHP API](cart_api.md) that allows for managing carts and cart entries, or validating products
- [REST API](../../api/rest_api/rest_api_reference/rest_api_reference.html#managing-ecommerce-carts) that helps get cart and products information over HTTP

> - [Twig functions](../../templating/twig_function_reference/cart_twig_functions.md) that enable checking whether product can be added to cart and formatting the price

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [Twig functions](cart_twig_functions.md) that enable checking whether product can be added to cart and formatting the price
```

There is no specific configuration related to the Cart component.
All configuration is done at the Checkout and Storefront level.

## Cart data handling

Cart data is handled by two storages, depending on whether the buyer is anonymous 
or has been authenticated.
Information that relates to anonymous users is stored in the PHP session, while 
registered user data is stored in a database.

> By default, anonymous users can add items to cart, but to display the cart view, 

Reviewer 2: That may be technically the truth, but is confusing: can anonymous users even view products on the frontend by default?

they have to log in and transition into an authenticated user.

!!! note 

    For information about roles and permissions that control access to the cart, 

>     see [Permission use cases](../../permissions/permission_use_cases.md#commerce)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    see [Permission use cases](permission_use_cases.md#commerce)
```

### Cart data merging

When a buyer browses the storefront anonymously and fills the cart with items, 
anonymous cart data is stored in the PHP session storage.
Then, when an anonymous user logs into the storefront, cart data from the PHP session 
storage is persisted and merged with any cart information that might already exist in the database for this authenticated user.

If no previous cart data exists, a new cart is created.

### Cart data validation

When a buyer tries to add products to the cart, increase cart item quantity or proceed to checkout, the Cart component performs cart item validation and checks whether:

- the product is available 
- the requested quantity of product is available 
- the product is available at a price in the currency selected for the cart 

## Front-end perspective

> From the front-end perspective, the Cart consists of a main component 
> and several widgets.
> Each of these components consists of JavaScript code and accompanying Twig templates.

Reviewer 3: `Cart` object does not have related Twig templates and does not consist of widgets. `Cart` is independent and widgets are using this object.
```suggestion
From the front-end perspective, the cart consists of a main `Cart` object 
and several widgets.
Each of these widgets consists of JavaScript code and accompanying Twig templates, whereas `Cart` is just a standalone JS object which manages cart data with no related UI.
```

### Main cart

> Main cart is the main UI component of the Cart module.

Reviewer 3: I would differentiate cart and Cart objects by writing them differently.
```suggestion
Main cart is the main UI component of the cart.
```

Among other things, it lists all items selected for purchase, displays 
product/variant images, availability information, requested cart item quantities, 

> cart item net prices and subtotals for each cart line. 

Reviewer 3: It only consists of items where each item has only quantity input and the remove button.
Anything else should be added by extending twig.

Users who visit the Main cart page can change cart line quantities, remove individual items, remove all items and see the total number of products in cart.

### Add to cart

By default, the Add to cart component consists of a quantity input field and a button.

> You counAdding variant selectors etc. requires extending the twig and JS component.

Reviewer 2: ?

> You counAdding variant selectors etc. requires extending the twig and JS component.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Having variant selectors etc. requires extending the twig and JS component.
```

### Minicart

> By default, the Minicart component consists of a counter that displays a total number of cart lines.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
By default, the Minicart component consists of a counter that displays the total number of products in a cart.
```

Author: It is cart entries, not products. If you add 5 pencils and one pen, it is 6 productsand minicart returns 2. I will replace lines with entries then.

### Cart summary 

The Cart Summary component displays a subtotal net value of cart lines, a shipping 
cost disclaimer, a series of tax values applicable to products 

> added in cart, different taxes composition, and a total cart value (gross, shipping 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
added in cart, different tax composition, and a total cart value (gross, shipping 
```

>   and taxes included) in the selected currency.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
and taxes included) in the selected currency.
```

> Users who visit the Cart summary widget can proceed to checkout or continue shopping 

Reviewer 3: Technically, the cart repository does not know about checkout (in other words, the cart package has no dependency on the checkout package).
And action buttons such as "go to checkout" or "continue shopping" are added by extending the summary twig.

by clicking one of the buttons.

> ## Cart object

Reviewer 3: I would put it first as it is the most important one.

> The `Cart` object stores cart entry data and a cart summary, which contains data from additional entries, like, for example, formatted gross price or validation errors.

Reviewer 3: Stating that the summary _contains data from additional entries_ is not correct, because there are no additional entries, there is just additional data for entries.
```suggestion
The `Cart` object stores cart entry data and a cart summary, which contains additional entries data, like, for example, formatted gross price or validation errors.
```

The object exposes several methods, which you can use to get and modify cart entries.
Only one instance of a `Cart` object can be created.

## Cart service 

> The Cart package provides a cart service, which is a module with functions used for calling the backend API. 

Reviewer 2: link to cart_api here
